.\"
.\" RichACL Manual Pages
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2015,2016  Red Hat, Inc.
.\" Written by Andreas Gruenbacher <agruenba@redhat.com>
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual.  If not, see
.\" <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.TH GETRICHACL 7 2015-09-01 "Linux" "Rich Access Control Lists"

.SH NAME
getrichacl \- Get Rich Access Control Lists

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B getrichacl
.RI [ option "]... [" file ]...

.SH DESCRIPTION
For each file,
.B getrichacl
displays the file name and the file's Rich Access Control List (RichACL).

The output format of
.B getrichacl
is as follows:

.fam C
.RS
.nf
 1:  file:
 2:      flags:a
 3:      owner:rwp-------------::mask
 4:      group:r-p-------------::mask
 5:      other:r---------------::mask
 6:     owner@:rwp-------------::allow
 7:   user:foo:r-p-------------::allow
 8:     group@:r-p-------------::allow
 9:  group:bar:r-p-------------::allow
10:  everyone@:r---------------::allow
11:
.fi
.RE
.fam T

Line 1 contains the file name, followed by a colon.

Line 2 contains the ACL flags. This line is omitted if no flags are set.

Lines 3--5 indicate the owner, group, and other file masks, which are only
shown if the \fB\-\-raw\fR option is specified.

Lines 6--10 indicate different ACL entries for the file owner
.RB ( owner@ ),
user \fIfoo\fR, the owning group
.RB ( group@ ),
group \fIbar\fR, and for everyone
.RB ( everyone@ ).

A blank line follows at the end.

The default output format uses the single-letter forms of flags and
permissions, identifiers of ACL entries are right justified, permissions are
vertically aligned, and permissions which are always granted
.RB ( read_attributes ", " read_acl ", " synchronize )
are omitted. See the
.BR richacl (7)
manual page for the defined flags and permissions.

By default,
.B getrichacl
displays the effective permissions remaining after applying the file masks to
the ACL.  The file masks and underlying NFSv4 ACL can be displayed with the
\fB\-\-raw\fR option.

When
.B getrichacl
is used on a file that does not have a RichACL or on a filesystem that does not
support RichACLs, it displays the access permissions defined by the traditional
file permission bits as a RichACL. When
.B getrichacl
is used on a file that has a POSIX ACL (see
.BR acl (5)),
it prints an error message.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-long\fR, \fB\-l\fR
Display access masks and flags in their long form.
.TP
\fB\-\-full\fR
Also show permissions which are always implicitly allowed.
.TP
\fB\-\-raw\fR
Show ACLs as stored on the file system, including the file masks. Implies
\fB\-\-full\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-unaligned\fR
Do not align ACL entries or pad missing permissions with '-'.
.TP
\fB\-\-numeric-ids\fR
Display numeric user and group IDs instead of names.
.TP
\fB\-\-access\fR [=\fIuser\fR[:\fIgroup\fR:...]}, \fB\-a\fR[\fIuser\fR[:\fIgroup\fR:...]}
Instead of showing the ACL, show which permissions the user running the command
has for the specified file(s).  When \fIuser\fR is specified, show which
permissions the specified user has instead.  If \fIuser\fR is followed by a
colon and a (possibly empty) list of groups, assume that \fIuser\fR is a member
in the specified groups; otherwise,
.BR getgrouplist (3)
is used to determine the groups \fIuser\fR is a member of.
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR, \fB\-v\fR
Display the version of
.B getrichacl
and exit.
.TP
\fB\-\-help\fR, \fB\-h\fR
Display command-line usage help text.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Andreas Grünbacher <agruenba@redhat.com>.

Please send your bug reports, suggested features and comments to the above address.

.SH CONFORMING TO
Rich Access Control Lists are Linux-specific.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR richacl (7),
.BR setrichacl (1)
