.\"
.\" RichACL Manual Pages
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2015,2016  Red Hat, Inc.
.\" Written by Andreas Gruenbacher <agruenba@redhat.com>
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual.  If not, see
.\" <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.TH SETRICHACL 7 2015-09-01 "Linux" "Rich Access Control Lists"
.SH NAME
setrichacl \- Set Rich Access Control Lists
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B setrichacl
.RI [ option "]... [" file ]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B setrichacl
utility sets or modifies Rich Access Control Lists (RichACLs) of files and
directories.
.PP
The
.B \-m
and
.B \-s
options expect an ACL or parts of an ACL on the command line. The
.B \-M
and
.B \-S
options read an ACL or parts of an ACL from a file. In either case, the entry
format is described in section
.I Text form
of the
.BR richacl (7)
manual page. The single-letter or long forms of flags and permissions can be
mixed arbitrarily. Multiple entries are separated by whitespace, newlines, or
commas.
.PP
Note that the order of entries in a RichACL is significant, and that reordering
entries may change the permissions granted.
.PP
The use of
.B deny
entries is discouraged. If
.B deny
entries are used, they should be placed ahead of
.B allow
entries for improved interoperability with Windows where possible.
.PP
When the file masks are not specified, they are computed automatically.
.PP
When the ACL to be set is simple enough that the traditional file permission
bits can express the same permissions,
.B setrichacl
sets the file permission bits and removes the ACL. When
.BR setrichacl 's
counterpart utility,
.BR getrichacl (1),
is used on a file or directory that does not have a RichACL, it displays the
access permissions defined by the file permission bits as an ACL. This means
that for simple ACLs,
.B getrichacl
may display a slightly different ACL which is equivalent to the one that was
set with
.BR setrichacl .
.SS Permissions
Setting ACLs or changing the file permission bits is allowed to the file owner,
to processes which have the
.B write_acl
permission, and to processes which have the
.B CAP_FOWNER
capability.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-modify\fR \fIacl\fR, \fB\-m\fR \fIacl\fR
Modify the ACL of \fIfile\fR by replacing existing entries with the entries in
\fIacl\fR, and adding all new entries. When the permissions of an entry are
empty, remove the entry.
.TP
\fB\-\-modify\-file\fR \fIacl_file\fR, \fB\-M\fR \fIacl_file\fR
Identical to \fB\-\-modify\fR, but read the ACL from \fIacl_file\fR instead. If
the file is \(lq\-\(rq, read from standard input.
.TP
\fB\-\-set\fR \fIacl\fR, \fB\-s\fR \fIacl\fR
Set the ACL of \fIfile\fR to \fIacl\fR. Any previous ACL is replaced.
ACL entries are separated by whitespace, newlines, or commas.
.TP
\fB\-\-set\-file\fR \fIacl_file\fR, \fB\-S\fR \fIacl_file\fR
Identical to \fB\-\-set\fR, but read the ACL from \fIacl_file\fR instead. If
the file is \(lq\-\(rq, read from standard input.
.TP
\fB\-\-remove\fR, \fB\-b\fR
Remove all extended permissions and revert to the file permission bits only.
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR, \fB\-v\fR
Display the version of
.B setrichacl
and exit.
.TP
\fB\-\-help\fR, \fB\-h\fR
Display command-line usage help text.
.\" .SH EXAMPLES
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Andreas Grünbacher <agruenba@redhat.com>.
.PP
Please send your bug reports, suggested features and comments to the above address.
.SH CONFORMING TO
Rich Access Control Lists are Linux-specific.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR getrichacl (1),
.BR richacl (7)
